Layout, everything to this point we've
been doing is making this change colors,
maybe making it change widths,
those kinds of things.
I wanna show you how to
move things around, right?
So notice, this is centered on the page,
for example, right?
How do I do stuff like that?
So my CSS didn't like this apparently,
which is fine.
But I had Box 1 and Box 2 and
they're next to each other.
So how did I do that?
All right, cuz these are just divs.
If you would expect,
I don't know why that's there,
it doesn't need to be.
If I do float left here,
if I get rid of that,
notice that they just go there,
and that's totally fine, right?
So these divs by default will take
the entire line onto themselves.
And if I want them to float next to each
other, and you can do this float: left,
and this will move them
next to each other.
Now, there's something pushing this
down and I'm not really sure what it is.
Is it the style tag?
No, it shouldn't be.
But, I mean,
this is always something with CSS.
What's the mystery thing
breaking it this time?
But in any case, typically those would
be just right next to each other.
I wonder if this looks
different in Chrome.
Nope, same, interesting.
But that's float left.
You can also do float right, and
this will float on the other way, right?
Notice that this one comes first, right?
Because that will float right first and
the next one will float next to it.
We'll get into flex here in just a little
bit, but this is saying Box 1 and Box 2.
Notice that they're centered,
that's what the flex is doing.
And yeah, nice border background.
And then we'll talk about margins, right?
So notice that there's
a space between them.
That's what margin does.
So if I get rid of this, notice that
they're just smooshed up against
each other, so that margin allows them
to be spaced away from each other.
And then you got nice
rounded corners there,
that's coming from the border radius.
And then line items, these three lines
make it so that these things are centered.
So float, you used to have to
do everything with float and
it was such a pain, as you can see here,
I am already having an issue with it.
You don't have to do float anymore,
there's so many more useful ways of doing
things like this, like flex, we'll have
a whole chapter on flex when we get there.
So, along those lines,
let's talk about the box model.
It's one of the most confusing things
about people that people have a hard time
grasping in CSS.
So I just wanted to spend a whole
bunch of time talking about it.
So everything in CSS has a display
property, whether it's set or not.
So every div, for example,
by default is display block.
It's just by default that way.
Everything that's a span, for example, is
display inline, which means treat it text.
So if you try and set width on
something that has display inline,
it just ignores it because text
doesn't have width per se, right?
It's just flows in how text flows.
So I don't know, inspect this here,
this is a little bit of,
it's a code thing, which is a span.
If I try and say on this,
width: 1,000 pixels,
Actually, that's really nice.
Firefox says,
hey, this actually has no effect on
this because you're on display inline.
These dev tools are great.
I didn't know I would do that.
However, if I say display: block,
now, because it's in block mode,
it's actually gonna respect that
width because it's actually gonna,
and notice it took the whole line now,
right?
Or if I go back to inline,
like it was before,
implicitly, Notice that it
doesn't have its own line.
So blocks by default will take
their entire line onto themselves.
You can make their height and
width change.
Whereas display inline will
just make it flow like text and
has no height or width, it just flows.
Now, those are just two, right?
We saw display flex.
There's also a hybrid here
called display: inline-block,
which is like,
I want you to flow into the text but
I also want you to respect my width and
height.
So just to hammer home,
border: 1px solid black.
Let's make not 1,000 pixels,
but let's make it 50 pixels.
So you can see there, it's actually
gonna respect my width there.
That's what the inline block does,
it's like, all right, still flowing with
the text, but I want you to respect
whatever height and width I'm setting.
So a good example of when you might
want that is an image where the text
wraps around it, right?
You're like, I want this to flow into
the text and be with the text, but
I also want you to respect what my
width and height would look like.
Okay, so that's display.
There's inline, there's block.
There's inline block.
There's flex,
which works a lot like block, but
allows you to do some flex properties.
We'll talk about that.
It also has an inline flex, which is
the same thing of, treat it like block,
flow with everything, but
also have my interior width as flex.
There's another section on grid and
inline grid, same sort of thing.
And there's also display table,
which is act like a table.
You almost never wanna do display table,
just use table if you need a table.
If you're doing something with display
table, ask yourself some questions cuz
you're probably doing something funky and
you could do it better.
That might be it.
I think that's it.
Okay, So height, width,
padding, border and margin.
People often get pretty confused about
what's the difference between all
of these.
So I have this little example here.
This is a block, right?
I have the interior content,
and everything around that,
you can think of being what the actual
height and width of everything is,
right,, Of just the interior content.
Everything inside of the red would
include the content plus the padding.
So that's the size of the actual
element itself, okay?
And then everything in the blue here,
you can think they're margins.
So that's how far away is
this from everything else?
So it pushes things away from it,
whereas padding pushes
the interior things inside of it.
So if I had this here,
the example, the border here,
3 pixels red,
that's where the border will be.
I have an interior padding of 5 pixels,
which is pushing it in that little
dotted line a little bit, right?
And I have a margin of 25,
which is the blue part,
which is pushing everything away from it.
So everything that's white
is inside of the element,
everything that's blue is
outside of the element.
That makes sense?
So anyway, think of padding
as the interior spacing, so
you wanna push your things inside it,
so you have more space inside
of your element, and
margin pushes everything else away.
Sometimes it doesn't make a difference,
right?
So for example,
this space between these two text blocks,
does it matter if I use padding or
margin to do that?
No, it really doesn't
matter which one it does.
But sometimes if you have backgrounds,
so for example, if I,
this has to be margin between these two
boxes here, because otherwise it'll just
make the box wider instead of pushing away
and having a whitespace between them.
That's why padding ends up
being really important.
It'll make more sense as
you go along with things.
So margin space outside.
So if you give something a background
color, for example, the margin doesn't get
the background color, right,
cuz it's outside of the element.
The border is the border,
right, the border is that.
And then padding,
if you give it a background color,
it will get that color cuz
it's inside of the element.
Okay, So
this doesn't have a set width, right?
So it'll actually just take up 100%
of the width that it can by default.
If I give it a width,
you can do it if you want to.
And I say width: 50px,
let's do 500 pixels, maybe.
Then it'll actually adhere
to whatever I'm doing.
And I can do that in pixels,
I can do that in percentages.
And then if it's a percentage,
it'll change with how wide the content is,
right?
So that can be useful as well.
All those kinda things.
Height, same thing.
You can't do height in percentage,
which people find kinda strange.
Height can only be in pixels.
The only thing that you can,
well, there's some other tips and
tricks to kind of do it, but
it's kind of advanced CSS use cases.
For now, you kinda just have to
set it absolute to say like,
this is gonna be 100 pixels height.
One thing I'm going to
advise you of right now,
just put this one line
in every CSS project.
This star right here is
called the wildcard.
I want you to never use it besides for
this purpose,
which means select literally everything.
Select everything and
make it box-sizing: border-box.
It just makes measuring everything simple.
There's a whole article on, yeah,
I linked to it right here from a really
cool guy named Paul Irish that said,
this is fine, you can go ahead and
do it this way.
What it does is if I say width
100 pixels of this red box,
do you expect it to include the border or
not?
So if I have a 3 pixel border,
if I say a width 100 pixels,
should the width actually be 100 pixels or
should it be 106 pixels,
cuz you have a border on either side?
Me, I want it to be 100 pixels and
I want it to include the border,
because it makes everything
way easier to measure, right?
And I don't have to go do
math every single time, okay,
what's the border plus the content area?
I don't have to worry about any of that.
If you do border box,
that's what that does.
It includes everything including
the border in your widths.
If you don't do it that way,
then by default,
everything is content box, I think,
is the name of that property.
It doesn't matter, you'll have to account
for the border every single time.
I'm intentionally not covering
floats a lot because,
You never have to use floats anymore.
You used to have to use them literally
all the time, but now with flex and
grid, you can pretty much always get
away with not using floats anymore.
And they're a pain, they're so painful.
And before floats,
we had to use tables for everything.
It was a dark time.
Yeah, you don't wanna
go back to those days.
Okay, So
we're gonna talk about float and
flex for just a second.
So I got these three boxes here that
I intentionally made different sizes
to kinda demonstrate to you
what's different about them.
They have to use same CSS, and
I'll be using the same CSS for
all these the entire time.
By default, if you don't do
anything with no floats, no flex,
nothing else,
this is what they look like, right?
They're spaced out, they by default have
a little bit of margin underneath them.
And yeah, they get laid out by default
just like that, just one each after
the other, they all wanna take
the entire line unto themselves, right?
If I float left,
this is what ends up happening.
And again, I have something
here that's pushing them down,
which is really interesting.
Typically, it wouldn't happen, they would
just be all top aligned with each other.
But they'll all try and fit onto a line.
And then if I,
Start making the browser expand,
I know, it will not be able to fit,
it starts pushing them onto the next line.
So it tries to fit everything, and
then once it runs out of space,
it'll push it down to the next line,
Which is kinda fun, right?
Here, now if I try and say float: right,
same thing, goes the other way.
And I think you can float: center.
No, maybe not.
Middle?
No, you don't,
you can actually do it that way.
So yeah,
you just have to float left or min.
As you can see,
it's limited in its usefulness and
it ends up being really hard to
get things exactly where you are.
And obviously, it's been long since I've
had to do floats that I don't remember
exactly all the nuances, cuz there's
a ton of nuance in how things will float.
So I want you to know
that they are out there.
I show you that because if you start
working at a company that's 20 years old,
you're probably gonna see
floated code in there.
These days, you don't have to use it,
you can use modem flex.
And now, we can even use grid,
which is a relative newcomer.
The problem when they release new CSS,
we have to wait five or
six years before everyone's
browser catches up,
because there's lots of people out there
that don't update their browser very much.
And so if you try and
ship code to them that uses modern CSS and
the browser doesn't understand it,
you have a problem, right?
Because the browser won't recognize it and
therefore won't apply it.